Pre Install guide rework (#447)
t2linux/wiki: docs/guides/preinstall.md

## Partition with Disk Utility

In macOS Disk Utility you need to create your Linux partition:

1. Open Disk Utility

> 2. Choose "Macintosh HD *volumes*"

Reviewer: Choose the volume you want to partition for Linux

This seems better, as the user needn't necessarily partition Macintosh HD. Also, if the user has renamed their macOS partition, then instead of Macintosh HD, the new name shall be there.

Author: Updated [4297a9b](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/4297a9bc7c5a0a832e88a59178fa8931fdbd07f3)

| blendOS            | <https://docs.blendos.co/guides/installation-guide-for-macs-with-t2-chip> |
| EndeavourOS        | <https://github.com/t2linux/EndeavourOS-ISO-t2/releases/latest> |
| Fedora             | <https://github.com/mikeeq/mbp-fedora> |
| Fedora             | <https://github.com/t2linux/fedora-iso/releases/latest> |
| Gentoo             | Please refer to this [page](https://wiki.t2linux.org/distributions/gentoo/installation/) |
| Manjaro            | <https://github.com/NoaHimesaka1873/manjaroiso-t2/releases/latest> |
| NixOS              | <https://github.com/t2linux/nixos-t2-iso> |
| Ubuntu & Kubuntu   | <https://github.com/t2linux/T2-Ubuntu/releases/latest> |

#### Other distributions

If you are a beginner we **highly recommend** to choose one of the distros above.

In case you wish to proceed manually, you can download the official ISO from the distro website, but you will have to use an external USB keyboard and mouse for the install process. Additionally, you may require a wired internet connection with a USB adapter.

Please, refer to this guide: [Basic setup](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/postinstall/).

> You can also find detailed info for unsupported debian-based distros [here](https://wiki.t2linux.org/distributions/debian/installation/).

Reviewer: Consider the fact that the wiki is not only about debian based distros, so the previous wording looks good to me.

Author: That's why there is the link to the Basic setup guide (postinstall.md)
I think the linking of the two guides can replace those lines:
```
Please, refer to this guide: [Basic setup](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/postinstall/).
You can also find detailed info for unsupported debian-based distros [here](https://wiki.t2linux.org/distributions/debian/installation/).
```
Basic setup explains the procedure for non-T2 iso
More specifically there is a guide for debian-based non supported distro, where it is also mentioned about the efi=noruntime parameter.

What do you think?

Reviewer: What I meant was that remove the word *debian-based*. Whatever you suggested for not supported distris is applicable for non-debian based unsupported distros as well.

Author: I just took it from the introduction: _This guide shall help you in installing a Debian or Ubuntu based Linux distro, which is not available as a modified ISO with T2 support._

What would like to modify?

Author: > What I meant was that remove the word _debian-based_. Whatever you suggested for not supported distris is applicable for non-debian based unsupported distros as well.

Should be good now: [0cf920b](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/0cf920b809b0dacc44977be2f11e2ec09755abae)

Reviewer: Are we modifying the debian guide or preinstall guide. You've yourself added the link of the debian guide here, I believe the previous original one was better.

Reviewer: Oh, I overlooked the heading, this seems good now.

Author: > Are we modifying the debian guide or preinstall guide. You've yourself added the link of the debian guide here, I believe the previous original one was better.
Reverted [e6e0838](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/e6e0838e5e772577acfea012b6bb449eec8301fd)

### Copying the ISO to the USB

User-friendly applications for copying the Linux install image to your USB include:

- [USBImager](https://gitlab.com/bztsrc/usbimager/)
- [balenaEtcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) (does collect analytics data)

> Or you can use the macOS terminal:

Reviewer: Or you can use *dd on* the macOS terminal:

1. Insert your USB drive.
2. Open macOS Terminal.
3. Run `diskutil list` to list all the drives.
4. Look up for your USB thumb which appears as an **external, physical** drive labelled `/dev/diskX` where `X` is a single number (e.g. /dev/disk**2**).
5. Run `sudo diskutil unmountDisk /dev/diskX` to unmount the disk.
6. Run `sudo dd if=path/to/linux.iso of=/dev/rdiskX bs=1m` to start writing. To fetch the iso path easily you can just drag and drop the .iso into the Terminal.
7. Now you may press `control-T` to make it show how many KBs it has written so far.

While the installation image is being written to the USB, you can skip to [Copy Wi-Fi firmware](#copy-wi-fi-firmware); but don't follow the steps after it, wait until the ISO has been written to disk.

## Copy Wi-Fi firmware

Linux's Wi-Fi driver uses the same Wi-Fi firmware files as macOS, so we copy these files from macOS to the EFI partition where Linux can access and eventually install them.

> [Follow here](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/wifi-bluetooth/#on-macos) the instructions for the **first part done in macOS** and come back to this page.

Reviewer: Can we simplify this line a bit? Follow the first part to be done in macOS of [this guide], maybe something like this.

Author: It sounds a lot better now: [12b7aa0](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/12b7aa0d90363d5052a341a5bb10283531e9d9e2)

The **second part "On Linux"** must be followed **after** you have completed the Linux installation.

## Disable Secure Boot

Now that you have completed the first part of the Wi-Fi firmware in macOS, you can proceed with the disabling of the secure boot.
Apple's Secure Boot implementation does not allow booting anything other than macOS or Windows when it is enabled (not even shim signed GRUB).
We need to disable it:

1. Turn off your Mac

> 2. Turn it on and rapidly press and hold `Command-R` until the black screen flashes

Reviewer: I don’t think “rapidly” word is required

Author: Removed [c7f57f2](https://github.com/t2linux/wiki/pull/447/commits/c7f57f2678d0ccc4500ffd1a4c80294b40962655)

3. Select the orange EFI option with arrow keys and press return/enter on it. If there are two, try the one to the very right first (the last one).
4. The installation may start right away or you may be put into a Bootloader Menu where it may select a default option e.g. "Try or Install Ubuntu", but you can use arrow keys to select a different option. If you are unsure, check if there is any additional advice on your distro's installation page on this wiki.

!!! Warning "A software update is required to use this startup disk"
    If you see this message when trying to boot Linux, Apple may be enforcing Secure Boot. Make sure you have [disabled Secure Boot](#disable-secure-boot). If there were two orange "EFI Boot" entries in Startup Manager, try selecting the other one. This may occur when booting Linux from a partition formatted as APFS or "macOS Extended" (also known as "hfs+"), even when Secure Boot is completely disabled.

## Follow distro specific steps

You can now follow the installation guide for your chosen distribution: [Guides for different distributions](https://wiki.t2linux.org/distributions/overview/)

!!! Warning "Automatic Partitioning"

>     The installers of many distros will provide options like "Automatic Partitioning" when installing Linux. **Do not use** "Automatic Partitioning" as it may remove macOS as well. You **always** must select the option that allows **"Manual Partitioning"**. Make sure that: **1.** you mount your EFI `/dev/nvme0n1p1`  at `/boot/efi` (or if you use a [separate EFI partition](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/windows/#using-seperate-efi-partitions), at whatever applies to your case). **2.** you mount your partition for Linux at `/`. **3.** if you created separate partitions for `/home`, `/boot`, etc.. you mount each of them correctly according to their mount points.

Reviewer: This change can be reverted

Reviewer: You reverted the wrong commit. The change for debian was fine. You need to revert the change I've pointed out in this review.

Author: reverted [1418a99](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/1418a99717e6f2a726d34932a8c4a6e8eaafbbe9)

### Selecting an ISO

> Listed below are the currently available ISO files with T2 support. Choose a distribution and follow the download link:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is an ISO with T2 support for your distro, you can download it here:
```

This change makes it much longer without improving clarity. The original sentence is already simple enough.

Author: ```suggestion
Listed below are the currently available ISO files to download:
```
I think it's more well written than "If there is.."

Reviewer 2: `Listed below are the currently available installer ISOs for download:` would be better

### Selecting an ISO

Listed below are the currently available installer ISOs for download:

| Linux Distribution | Download ISO with T2 support |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------- |
| Arch Linux         | <https://github.com/t2linux/archiso-t2/releases/latest> |
| blendOS            | <https://docs.blendos.co/guides/installation-guide-for-macs-with-t2-chip> |
| EndeavourOS        | <https://github.com/t2linux/EndeavourOS-ISO-t2/releases/latest> |
| Fedora             | <https://github.com/mikeeq/mbp-fedora> |
| Fedora             | <https://github.com/t2linux/fedora-iso/releases/latest> |
| Gentoo             | Please refer to this [page](https://wiki.t2linux.org/distributions/gentoo/installation/) |
| Manjaro            | <https://github.com/NoaHimesaka1873/manjaroiso-t2/releases/latest> |
| NixOS              | <https://github.com/t2linux/nixos-t2-iso> |
| Ubuntu & Kubuntu   | <https://github.com/t2linux/T2-Ubuntu/releases/latest> |

#### Other distributions

If you are a beginner we **highly recommend** to choose one of the distros above.

> 

Author: Corrected ["may require" as suggested](https://github.com/t2linux/wiki/pull/447/commits/94234ab942f9b49a1b36a6eb1d14c97c30baa2df)

Or you can use the macOS terminal:

1. Insert your USB drive.
2. Open macOS Terminal.
3. Run `diskutil list` to list all the drives.
4. Look up for your USB thumb which appears as an **external, physical** drive labelled `/dev/diskX` where `X` is a single number (e.g. /dev/disk**2**).
5. Run `sudo diskutil unmountDisk /dev/diskX` to unmount the disk.
6. Run `sudo dd if=path/to/linux.iso of=/dev/rdiskX bs=1m` to start writing. To fetch the iso path easily you can just drag and drop the .iso into the Terminal.
7. Now you may press `control-T` to make it show how many KBs it has written so far.

While the installation image is being written to the USB, you can skip to [Copy Wi-Fi firmware](#copy-wi-fi-firmware); but don't follow the steps after it, wait until the ISO has been written to disk.

## Copy Wi-Fi firmware

Linux's Wi-Fi driver uses the same Wi-Fi firmware files as macOS, thereby we copy them from macOS to the EFI partition where Linux can access and install them.

[Follow here](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/wifi-bluetooth/#on-macos) the instructions for the **first part done in macOS** and come back to this page.

> 

Reviewer: This change seems to unnecessary

Author: Reverted the first part with some change to the "files" word repeated.
About the second one "Follow the instructions in this section to be followed" - _follow to be followed_ seems to me harder to read. 
I think the second part now is better clarified as in the commit [91c69da](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/91c69da74093a33156fd9bc6e03eec0984c86815)
 ·

While the installation image is being written to the USB, you can skip to [Copy Wi-Fi firmware](#copy-wi-fi-firmware); but don't follow the steps after it, wait until the ISO has been written to disk.

## Copy Wi-Fi firmware

Linux's Wi-Fi driver uses the same Wi-Fi firmware files as macOS, so we copy these files from macOS to the EFI partition where Linux can access these files and then install them.
Linux's Wi-Fi driver uses the same Wi-Fi firmware files as macOS, thereby we copy them from macOS to the EFI partition where Linux can access and install them.

[Follow here](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/wifi-bluetooth/#on-macos) the instructions for the **first part done in macOS** and come back to this page.

Follow the instructions in this section to be followed on macOS [here](https://wiki.t2linux.org/guides/wifi-bluetooth/#on-macos). The sections of that page to be followed on Linux can be followed later, once you've successfully installed Linux.
The **second part "On Linux"** must be followed **after** you have completed the Linux installation.

## Disable Secure Boot

> !!! note

Reviewer: Except for the steps written down to change secure boot state, the other minor edits are uncessary. Also, you’ve removed the warning notes, why?

Author: The warning note for "wait to finish creating your install usb" is already mentioned on line 67. I think it's redundant here after two steps.
The warning for "and you have copied Wi-Fi firmware" I also think it's redundant. Since it is already specified to come back on this guide again after finishing (line 73). 
That's why the !note has been removed in the commit.

   - set Allow Boot  Media to **Allow booting from external or removable media**

Now you are able to boot from a Linux install ISO.

!!! Note "Keeping your Mac secure while Secure Boot is off"
    If you are worried about the reduced security, in Startup Security Utility you can select "Turn On Firmware Password" to require entering a password to boot anything other than the default OS (Currently that would be macOS). After installing Linux on the internal SSD, you have the option to reselect "Disallow booting from external or removable media" in Startup Security Utility.
    If you are worried about the reduced security, in Startup Security Utility you can select "Turn On Firmware Password" to require entering a password to boot anything other than the
    default OS. Additionally, after installing Linux on the internal SSD, you will have the option to reselect "Disallow booting from external or removable media" in the Startup Security
    Utility.

## Booting your Linux install USB

1. Ensure the Linux Installation USB you created is plugged into your Mac.
2. Reboot while holding down the option (⌥) key, this will put you in macOS Startup Manager.

> 3. Select the orange EFI option with arrow keys and press return/enter on it. If there are two, try the one to the very right first.

Reviewer: Why removed try? Second one the generally the one, but in some cases the first one also works.

Author: I think you are right, added try! [345547e](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/345547e92f485fc37c97359106ce0aa72ef19b95)

> 4. The installation may start right away or you may be put into a Bootloader Menu where it may select a default option e.g. "Try or Install Ubuntu", but you can use arrow keys to select a different option if you want.

Reviewer: What about the instruction stating to refer to the distros installation page?

Author: I reverted the missing piece of the distro installation page. [89f231d](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/89f231dafc5bd679bcb3e0ac4be78c1bcd82d1e5)

4. You may be put into a Bootloader Menu, it may select a default option if no keys are pressed, but you can use arrow keys to select a different option if you want. They should be labeled, but if you are unsure, check if there is any additional advice on your distro's installation page on this wiki.
3. Select the orange EFI option with arrow keys and press return/enter on it. If there are two, select the one to the very right (the last one).
4. The installation may start right away or you may be put into a Bootloader Menu where it may select a default option e.g. "Try or Install Ubuntu", but you can use arrow keys to select a different option if you want.

!!! Warning "A software update is required to use this startup disk"

>     If you see this message when trying to boot Linux, Apple may be enforcing secure boot. Make sure you have it [turned off](#disable-secure-boot), and if there were two Orange "EFI Boot" entries in Startup Manager, try selecting the other one. This occurs when booting Linux from a partition formatted as APFS or "macOS Extended" (also known as "hfs+") even when Secure Boot is completely disabled.

Author: Reverted [df57217](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/df57217ff497820f13aaa8539c885d9a8c04dc75)

> ### Before proceeding:

Reviewer: Again, a warning sign removed. I believe a warning box shall attract the eyes of a person more than a separate section written here.

Author: Reverted the warning sign. Just not sure if the formatting is right. I really want to make the mount points in bulleted list.

The recommendation to choose the distro in the overview has been removed, since there is already specified everything in the ISO choosing section. [61c3eb8](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/61c3eb8df1ad0637f6de48d4c2889cdb9dee2fe3)

Reviewer: I guess there is some grammatical error here.

Author: I can't find an error in my commit: [8596ecc](https://github.com/gianmaticus/wiki/commit/8596ecc87ae2969f82bf4aa3091a83f461cd12ef)
Where?

| Manjaro            | <https://github.com/NoaHimesaka1873/manjaroiso-t2/releases/latest> |
| NixOS              | <https://github.com/t2linux/nixos-t2-iso> |
| Ubuntu             | <https://github.com/t2linux/T2-Ubuntu/releases/latest> |

> | Kubuntu            | <https://github.com/t2linux/T2-Ubuntu/releases/latest> |

Author: It seems a fair solution, considered the same link
